Polysaccharides are giant polymers of monosaccharides connected by glycosidic linkages (Figure 3.16).
 Starch is a polysaccharide of glucose with α-glycosidic
linkages.
 Glycogen is a highly branched polysaccharide of glucose.
 Cellulose is also a polysaccharide of glucose, but its
individual monosaccharides are connected by β-glycosidic linkages.
Starch actually comprises a large family of giant molecules
of broadly similar structure. While all starches are large polymers of glucose with α linkages (Figure 3.16a), the different
starches can be distinguished by the amount of branching
that occurs at carbons 1 and 6 (Figure 3.16b). Some plant
starches are unbranched, as in plant amylose; others are moderately branched, as in plant amylopectin. Starch readily
binds water, and when that water is removed, unbranched
starch tends to form hydrogen bonds between the polysaccharide chains, which then aggregate. This is what causes
bread to become hard and stale. Adding water and gentle
heat separates the chains and the bread becomes softer.
The polysaccharide glycogen stores glucose in animal livers and muscles. Starch and glycogen serve as energy storage compounds for plants and animals, respectively. These
polysaccharides are readily hydrolyzed to glucose monomers, which in turn can be further degraded to liberate their
stored energy and convert it to forms that can be used for cellular activities. If it is glucose that is actually needed for fuel,
why must it be stored as a polymer? The reason is that 1,000
glucose molecules would exert 1,000 times the osmotic pressure (causing water to enter the cells; see Chapter 5) of a single glycogen molecule. If it were not for polysaccharides,
many organisms would expend a lot of time and energy expelling excess water.
Cellulose is the predominant component of plant cell
walls, and is by far the most abundant organic (carbon-containing) compound on Earth. Starch can be easily degraded
by the actions of chemicals or enzymes. Cellulose, however,
is chemically more stable because of its β-glycosidic linkages
(Figure 3.16a). Thus starch is a good storage medium that can
be easily broken down to supply glucose for energy-producing reactions, while cellulose is an excellent structural material that can withstand harsh environmental conditions without changing.